---
layout: post
title: "BLAS issues"
tags: support
author: Gertjan van Zwieten
---

Two months ago I reported on [this strange issue]
(https://github.com/nutils/nutils/issues/8) that was triggered by numpy within a
forked process, causing the program to hang indefinitely. A [duplicate issue]
(https://github.com/nutils/nutils/issues/8) led to [OpenBLAS]
(http://www.openblas.net/) being the culprit, in particular its multithreading
capabilities, which opened up an easy fix in the form of disabling these via an
environment variable `OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS=1`. Problem solved. Until last month,
when an update rendered the fix invalid on two separate Debian machines.

An alternative fix seems to be to discard OpenBLAS altogether and switch to one
of the many other BLAS implementations. The self-optimizing [ATLAS]
(http://math-atlas.sourceforge.net/) project appears to work well, an is easily
installed from the package archive as `libatlas3-base`. Two things to note: 1.
Installing an additional BLAS library makes the machine having to choose from
multiple options; an additional step is required to make it pick ATLAS. And
2., the packaged version being precompiled it is not tuned for the system you
are installing on, but also that is fixable. Let's take these one by one.

In order to deal with multiple libraries/software providing the same service
Debian uses an [alternatives
system](https://wiki.debian.org/DebianAlternatives). A set of symlinks is
maintained in the directory `/etc/alternatives` with names like `editor`,
`mpg123`, and `libblas.so`. Packages with a `provides` field register
alternatives at installation, and the one with highest priority gets to be
symlinked in auto mode. To switch to manual mode and select ATLAS from a list
use the administration tool:

    # update-alternatives --config libblas.so.3

    There are 3 choices for the alternative libblas.so.3 (providing
    /usr/lib/libblas.so.3).

      Selection    Path                                     Priority   Status
    ------------------------------------------------------------
      0            /usr/lib/openblas-base/libopenblas.so.0   40        auto mode
    * 1            /usr/lib/atlas-base/atlas/libblas.so.3    35        manual mode
      2            /usr/lib/libblas/libblas.so.3             10        manual mode
      3            /usr/lib/openblas-base/libopenblas.so.0   40        manual mode

Similarly you can change `liblapack.so.3` from the default
([Netlib](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/)) to ATLAS, even though there are no
bugs related to the former.

To generate optimized libraries we can follow the instructions in
`/usr/share/doc/libatlas3-base/README.Debian`. The relevant steps are:

    # apt-get source atlas
    # apt-get build-dep atlas
    # apt-get install devscripts
    # cd atlas-3.10.1
    # fakeroot debian/rules custom

Proceed by installing all the generated .deb packages. They will automatically
have higher priority than the default packages and can peacefully coexist with
the rest of the Debian software stack. Compilation will take a long time though,
and I have not been able to determine if the automatic tuning is affected by
system load (advice appreciated).

One interesting thing that came out of the compilation process is that my
processors were not operating in performance mode. Most desktop environments
provide widgets or other means to update frequency scaling, but on headless
servers this may evidently go unnoticed. The build process suggests to use
`cpufreq-set` to change the frequency for each individual CPU separately, but
this will be undone at reboot. Better is to do as described [here]
(https://wiki.debian.org/HowTo/CpuFrequencyScaling), and create a file
`/etc/default/cpufrequtils` to define the `GOVERNOR` variable:

    # valid values: userspace conservative powersave ondemand performance
    # get them from cat
    # /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu0/cpufreq/scaling_available_governors 
    GOVERNOR="performance"

Follow this by `service cpufrequtils restart` to update all CPU frequencies, and
keep them updated also after reboot.
